---
layout: post
title: Qubes OS 3.1 has been released
author: Joanna Rutkowska
---

I'm happy to announce that today we're releasing Qubes OS 3.1!

The major new architectural feature of this release has been the introduction of
[Qubes Management
infrastructure](https://www.qubes-os.org/news/2015/12/14/mgmt-stack/), which is
based on popular Salt management software.

In Qubes 3.1 this management stack makes it possible to conveniently control
system-wide Qubes configuration using centralized, declarative statements.
_Declarative_ is a key word here: it makes creating advanced configurations
significantly simpler (the user or administrator needs only to specify _what_
they want to get, rather than _how_ they want to get it).

This has already allowed us to improve our installation wizard (firstboot) so
that it now offers the user ability to easily select various options to
pre-create some useful configurations, such as e.g. Whonix or USB-hosting VMs.

![Qubes OS 3.1 Firstboot Screenshot]({{ site.url }}/resources/qubes-31-firstboot-mgmt.png)

Currently the management stack is limited to Dom0 and system-wide Qubes
configuration (i.e. what VMs should be present, with what properties, how
connected), and notably missing is the ability to configure/manage states
_inside_ the VMs or templates (e.g. what packages to be installed, or what
additional services to be enabled in the VMs).

I think most readers should understand very well that marrying a powerful and
flexible, yet very complex, management software such as Salt, with a
security-focused system like Qubes OS is an extremely sensitive task. This is
because we really would not like to negate all the isolation we have previously
worked hard to build, obviously.

Yet, we have recently come up with - what we believe is - an elegant way to also
extend our management stack to cover the VMs' internal states. In fact we
already have a working code for this and plan on introducing this feature
officially in the upcoming Qubes 4.0 release candidate. We might also decide to
bring it to the 3.1 release (as an optional update), in case we couldn't release
4.0-rc1 soon enough.

Once we introduce this missing piece of the Qubes management infrastructure we
will gain almost limitless possibilities to shape Qubes configurations to fit
particular user groups' needs and deliver them easily.

Besides the management stack there have been a number of other improvements and
bugfixes introduced in 3.1 compared to Qubes 3.0, and most of these have already
been mentioned in the [original 3.1-rc1 announcement
post](https://www.qubes-os.org/news/2015/12/08/qubes-OS-3-1-rc1-has-been-released/).
To name here just the two which might be of critical importance to some users
(as they significantly improve hardware compatibility): Qubes 3.1 now supports
UEFI-based boot, as well as many new GPUs, thanks to the updated drivers and
kernel in Dom0.

The ISO can be downloaded [here](https://www.qubes-os.org/downloads/). As usual
we encourage people to verify integrity of the downloaded images as explained
[here](https://www.qubes-os.org/doc/verifying-signatures/).

Existing users of the 3.0 and 3.1-rcX releases should be able to easily upgrade
without re-installing. Enjoy!
